
# MIPS 32-bit Processor Simulator

A 5-stage non-pipelined MIPS processor simulator written in Python.

It takes machine code generated by the MARS assembler and executes it through a simulated datapath, demonstrating functionality using a custom MIPS assembly implementation of the `lower_bound` (STL) algorithm.

## Features
* **5-Stage Datapath:** Simulates Instruction Fetch (IF), Instruction Decode (ID), Execute (EX), Memory Access (MEM), and Write Back (WB) stages.
* **Byte-Addressable Memory:** Separated into Instruction Memory (`.text` segment starting at `0x00400000`) and Data Memory (`.data` segment starting at `0x10010000`).
* **Supported Instructions:**
  * **R-Type:** `add`, `addu` , `sub`, `and`, `or`, `slt`, `sll`, `srl`
  * **I-Type:** `addi`, `addiu`, `andi`, `ori`, `lui`, `lw`, `sw`, `beq`, `bne`
  * **J-Type:** `j`
* **System Calls:** Supports MARS syscalls for printing integers (1), printing strings (4), printing characters (11), and program exit (10).
* **Cycle-by-Cycle Trace:** Optional debug mode to visualize register states, ALU operations, and memory access per clock cycle.

## Project Structure
* `processor.py`: The main Python simulator containing the class-based architecture (`RegisterFile`, `ALU`, `Memory`, `MIPS_Processor`).
* `lower_bound.asm`: The MIPS assembly code that finds the first element greater than or equal to a target in a sorted array.
* `text_segment machine_code.txt`: The assembled `.text` segment (Binary Text format).
* `data_segment machine code.txt`: The assembled `.data` segment (Binary Text format).
* `Report.pdf`: Detailed documentation, design assumptions, and execution snapshots.

## Prerequisites
* **Python 3**
* **MARS MIPS Assembler** (Requires Java)

## How to Run

### Step 1: Assemble the Code in MARS
1. Open `lower_bound.asm` in the MARS Assembler.
2. Press **F3**  to assemble the code.

### Step 2: Export Memory Segments
The Python simulator requires the machine code in **Binary Text** format (strings of 0s and 1s).
1. In MARS, go to **File -> Dump Memory**.
2. Select the **`.text`** memory segment.
3. Choose **Binary Text** as the dump format and save it as `text_segment machine code.txt` in the same directory as the Python script.
4. Repeat the process for the **`.data`** memory segment, saving it as `data_segment machine code.txt`.

### Step 3: Run the Simulator
Open a terminal in the project directory and run the Python script.

```bash
python3 processor.py 
```
---
